Insights Operator pulling and exposing data from the OCM API (#683)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/insights/pulling-sca-certs-from-ocm.md

---
title: pulling-and-exposing-sca-certs-from-ocm
authors:
  - "@tremes"
reviewers:
  - "@sbose78"
  - "@inecas"
  - "@petli-openshift"
  - "@bparees"
  - "@dhellman"
  - "@mfojtik"
  - "@adambkaplan"
approvers:
  - "@sbose78"
  - "@bparees"
  - "@dhellman"
creation-date: 2021-03-04
last-updated: 2021-08-10
status: implementable
see-also:
replaces:
superseded-by:
---

# Insights Operator pulling and exposing SCA certs from the OCM API

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [x] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

> This enhancement will enable the Insights Operator to pull the data (SCA certs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This enhancement will enable the Insights Operator to pull the Simple Content Access certs for using RHEL subscription content
```

> from the OCM (OpenShift Cluster Manager) API. The data will be exposed by the Insights Operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from the OCM (OpenShift Cluster Manager) API. The certs will be exposed by the Insights Operator
```

in the OpenShift API to allow users to use them when consuming and building container images
on the platform.

## Motivation

Users could consume RHEL content and container images using the RHEL subscription in the OpenShift 3.x.
In the OpenShift 4, this is no longer possible because the Red Hat Enterprise Linux Core OS (RHCOS) does not
provide any attached subscription. This enhancement is to provide users the Simple Content Access (SCA) certs
from Red Hat Subscription Manager (RHSM).

### Goals

- Extend the Insights Operator config with an OCM API URL to be able to query the data
- Periodically pull the data from the OCM API and expose it in the OpenShift API

> - This is an opt-in feature by a cluster user and might be moved to a different OCP component in the future

Reviewer: If we think this might move to a different component in the future, should the config be tied to the insights operator configuration now?

Author: I added new section `Configuration` explaining the current situation https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/683/files#diff-93dffd2aa59c973a916306675f62907275cff29ff9a16ba77aaf98cfa830249fR102

### Non-Goals

- Insights Operator providing any transformation or post-processing of the SCA certs pulled
  from the OCM API

## Proposal

### Why is it in the Insights Operator?

The Insights Operator is now the only OCP component that connects an OpenShift cluster to a Red Hat subscription experience (console.redhat.com APIs). The consumers of the SCA certs are not only builds, but also shared resources, such as the CSI driver.

### User Stories

#### Consume SCA certs exposed in the API

As an OpenShift user
I want to consume SCA certs to be able to consume RHEL content and to build
corresponding container images.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### OCM API is down

Risk: OCM API is down or doesn't provide up to date data.

Risk: Insights Operator is unable to expose/update the data in the OpenShift API

Mitigation: The Insights Operator is marked as Degraded (in case of HTTP error code other than 404, which means that the organization didn't allow this feature on the OCM side).

> ## Design Details

Reviewer: The goals mention that this is an opt-in feature. How is it enabled?

### Authorization

The Insights Operator is able to pull the data from the OCM API using the existing `cloud.openshift.com` token
available in the `pull-secret` (in the `openshift-config-managed` namespace).

The Insights Operator must provide a cluster ID as an identifier of the cluster.

### SCA certs in API

> The SCA certificate is available via the `etc-pki-entitlement` secret in the `openshift-config-managed` namespace. The secret will be available for use in other namespaces by creating a cluster-scoped `Share` resource. Cluster admin creates a `clusterrolebinding` to allow a service account access to the `Share` resource.

Reviewer 2: I would propose we have the Insights Operator create the `Share` resource as well. This would help tell admins that the `etc-pki-entitlement` secret in the `openshift-config-managed` namespace is a candidate for propagation across namespaces. This was discussed initially but I had put this on hold since the `Share` API was under development as part of an OLM operator. Things have changed since the - we'll have the `Share` resource available on day 0.

I would suggest we add this to this EP and implement the same in parts whenever the `Share` resource becomes available on clusters.

Author: Based on our discussion, the creation of the `Share` resource object is described in the [### Tech Preview -> GA](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/683/files#diff-93dffd2aa59c973a916306675f62907275cff29ff9a16ba77aaf98cfa830249fR132)

### Use of the SCA certs

- The SCA certificate can be mounted to a `Pod` as a CSI volume (where the volume attributes will reference the `Share` resource making the secret accessible)
- The SCA certificate can be mounted to a `Build` strategy as a CSI volume. The CSI driver is described in the [Share Secrets And ConfigMaps Across Namespaces via a CSI Driver](/enhancements/cluster-scope-secret-volumes/csi-driver-host-injections.md) enhancement and implemented in [https://github.com/openshift/csi-driver-shared-resource](https://github.com/openshift/csi-driver-shared-resource).

### Update period
- Insights Operator query the OCM API every 8 hours and downloads the full data provided

> - The time period is configurable and can be changed by the cluster admin. Cluster admin can temporarily set a shorter time period to try to refresh the SCA certs

Reviewer: Is there an API for adjusting the time period, or is the setting in a ConfigMap?

Author: It can be done via `support` secret. Let me mention it here. Thanks

Author: I also added new section `Configuration` describing all the config options.

### Goals

- Extend the Insights Operator config with an OCM API URL to be able to query the data
- Periodically pull the data from the OCM API and expose it in the OpenShift API
- This is an opt-in feature by a cluster user and might be moved to a different OCP component in the future

### Non-Goals

- Insights Operator providing any transformation or post-processing of the SCA certs pulled
  from the OCM API

## Proposal

### Why is it in the Insights Operator?

The Insights Operator is now the only OCP component that connects an OpenShift cluster to a Red Hat subscription experience (console.redhat.com APIs). The consumers of the SCA certs are not only builds, but also shared resources, such as the CSI driver.

### User Stories

#### Consume SCA certs exposed in the API

As an OpenShift user
I want to consume SCA certs to be able to consume RHEL content and to build
corresponding container images.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### OCM API is down

Risk: OCM API is down or doesn't provide up to date data.

Risk: Insights Operator is unable to expose/update the data in the OpenShift API

Mitigation: Introduce a new state in the Insights Operator (e.g "SCADataDegraded") and

> create a new alert based on this new state.

Reviewer 3: this is outdated, right?  i think there was agreement to just use the degraded state.

since it's a techpreview feature, people can't upgrade anyway, but we can use this to gather data about whether the operator is going degraded in customer clusters frequently, and what the implications of that are, before we GA the feature.

We should definitely ensure we've gathered some data on how often this operator is going degraded due to this feature before we GA the feature.

Author: OK makes sense to me. Perhaps we should explicitly define the HTTP error states when the IO goes degraded (after some threshold/retries), because for example 404 means that the org didn't allow this feature (in OCM or RHSM I guess) so there's no reason to degrade it.

Reviewer 3: yes that would be good.

Author: I added it to the mitigation description.

from the OCM (OpenShift Cluster Manager) API. The certificates will be exposed by the Insights Operator
in the OpenShift API to allow users to use them when consuming and building container images
on the platform.

## Motivation

Users could consume RHEL content and container images using the RHEL subscription in the OpenShift 3.x.
In the OpenShift 4, this is no longer possible because the Red Hat Enterprise Linux Core OS (RHCOS) does not
provide any attached subscription. This enhancement is to provide users the Simple Content Access (SCA) certs
from Red Hat Subscription Manager (RHSM).

### Goals

- Extend the Insights Operator config with an OCM API URL to be able to query the certificates
- Periodically pull the certificates from the OCM API and expose it in the OpenShift API
- This is an opt-in feature by a cluster user and might be moved to a different OCP component in the future

### Non-Goals

- Insights Operator providing any transformation or post-processing of the SCA certs pulled
  from the OCM API

## Proposal

### Why is it in the Insights Operator?

> The Insights Operator is now the only OCP component that connects an OpenShift cluster to a Red Hat subscription experience (console.redhat.com APIs). The consumers of the SCA certs are not only builds, but also shared resources, such as the CSI driver.

Reviewer 4: The ultimate consumers are any workload that needs access to RHEL subscription content. OpenShift Builds are expected to be the largest consumer.

Author: Updated the sentence. THanks

### User Stories

#### Consume SCA certs exposed in the API

As an OpenShift user
I want to consume SCA certs to be able to consume RHEL content and to build
corresponding container images.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### OCM API is down

Risk: OCM API is down or doesn't provide up to date data.

Risk: Insights Operator is unable to expose/update the data in the OpenShift API

> Mitigation: The Insights Operator is marked as Degraded (in case the HTTP code is lower than 200 or greater than 399 and is not equal to 404, because HTTP 404 means that the organization didn't allow this feature).

Reviewer 4: Degraded means the cluster can't upgrade. Are we sure we want this?

Reviewer 3: yes, we want it.

1) this is tech preview.  we should absolutely gather data on whether this operator is ending up degraded during the tech preview period before making a final decision for GA

2) degraded doesn't block z-stream upgrades, and can be overridden for y-stream upgrades, the point is it's a conscious choice.  I gave this (somewhat dubious) example in another comment thread on this EP:  suppose you have pods that need this entitlement to do work at startup.  Doing an upgrade is going to trigger all those pods to restart.  You want to know, before you upgrade your cluster, that you don't have valid entitlements on your cluster, or all those pods are going to fail to restart after the node reboots triggered by the upgrade.

fundamentally this operator has a job to do, and if it's not doing the job, it should report degraded(after a reasonable period of time)

Reviewer 3: that said, going degraded should only happen after some number of retries or period of time.  not on first failure.

Reviewer 3: and needs to take into account disconnected clusters (i.e. it shouldn't be degraded on a cluster w/ no network access)

> ## Design Details

Reviewer 3: is your operator going to respect the cluster proxy configuration so it can reach OCM if the cluster is behind a proxy?

what will it do if the cluster is running disconnected?

Author: The operator should respect the cluster wide proxy configuration and shouldn't go degraded in a disconnected environment. Good points. Thanks. Let me put it there.

Author: Updated.

### Authorization

The Insights Operator is able to pull the certificates from the OCM API using the existing `cloud.openshift.com` token

> available in the `pull-secret` (in the `openshift-config-managed` namespace).

Author: Updated. Thanks

The Insights Operator must provide a cluster ID as an identifier of the cluster.

### SCA certs in API

> The SCA certificate is available via the `etc-pki-entitlement` secret in the `openshift-config-managed` namespace. The secret will be available for use in other namespaces by creating a cluster-scoped `Share` resource. Cluster admin creates a `clusterrolebinding` to allow a service account access to the `Share` resource.

Reviewer 5: Not covered in this sentence is the structure of the Secret.  Will a particular well-known key be used?  If so, can we document it here, or is that a low-enough level of detail that it's not worth including in the enhancement proposal?

Reviewer 4: IIRC the key name can be any `.pem` file. On a RHEL system the subscription cert key names have what appear to be a uuid for the file name.

Author: Maybe we should mention it here. I am using `kubernetes.io/tls` secret with `tls.crt` for the certificate and `tls.key` for the private key.

### Use of the SCA certs

- The SCA certificate can be mounted to a `Pod` as a CSI volume (where the volume attributes will reference the `Share` resource making the secret accessible)
- The SCA certificate can be mounted to a `Build` strategy as a CSI volume. The CSI driver is described in the [Share Secrets And ConfigMaps Across Namespaces via a CSI Driver](/enhancements/cluster-scope-secret-volumes/csi-driver-host-injections.md) enhancement and implemented in [https://github.com/openshift/csi-driver-shared-resource](https://github.com/openshift/csi-driver-shared-resource).

### Configuration
- The new configuration is tied to the Insights Operator, because the Insights Operator is currently the only component reading and using the `console.redhat.com` authentication token in the `pull-secret` in the `openshift-config` namespace, so if we decide to move this somewhere else, we must consider this fact.
- The new OCM API related config attributes are adjustable via `support` secret in the `openshift-config` namespace
- Following attributes are configurable via the `support` secret:
  - OCM API endpoint
  - time period to query the OCM API

>   - flag to disable this functionality

Reviewer 5: None of these three attributes sound particularly sensitive to me.  Maybe this should be a ConfigMap and not a Secret?  Or am I missing something about why one or all of them is sensitive?

Author: Yes, Ben is right. The `support` secret is already used for the Insights config stuff (ingress url, gathering period) and I don't know either why a secret is used as the config resource.

Author: Well maybe because you can configure there also username/password for the basic auth https://github.com/openshift/insights-operator/blob/master/pkg/config/configobserver/configobserver.go#L134.

### Update period
- Insights Operator query the OCM API every 8 hours and downloads the full data provided

> - The time period is configurable (via `support` secret) and can be changed by the cluster admin. Cluster admin can temporarily set a shorter time period to try to refresh the SCA certs

Reviewer 6: They are valid for a year, but will be revoked and regenerated by Candlepin if available content changes.

> - The time period is configurable (via `support` secret) and can be changed by the cluster admin. Cluster admin can temporarily set a shorter time period to try to refresh the SCA certs

Reviewer 3: thanks

- The documentation will describe the steps how to pull the SCA certs and update the secret manually

### Test Plan

- `insights-operator-e2e-tests` suite can verify the SCA cert data
  is available

> - Basic test of the validity of the SCA certs. Mount the `etc-pki-entitlement` secret and run e.g `yum install` in the container

Reviewer 5: Since most consumers will presumably be mounting the Share, maybe this integration test should use that approach instead of shortcutting to use the Secret directly?

Reviewer 4: I think the bits involving the `Share` resource should ultimately live in the OpenShift build suite. Test plan as follows:

1. <Assume> insights operator obtains SCA cert from OCM
2. <Assume> insights operator creates `Share` resource and ClusterRoleBinding
3. ocp build suite creates a build that does a yum install of subscription-only content

### Graduation Criteria

> This feature is planned as a technical preview in OCP 4.9 and is planned to go GA in 4.10.

Reviewer 4: Note that the `Share` bits are now planned as tech preview for OCP 4.10

Author: Does it mean that it will block the graduation criteria from the TP to GA mentioned here? If so then we would need to go GA with your bits...I guess

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview
- opt-in feature (called `InsightsOperatorPullingSCA`) enabled with `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` feature set
- Insights Operator is able to download the certificates from OCM API and expose it in a cluster API

> - Insights Operator is marked as degraded in case of the number of unsuccessful requests to the OCM API exceeds defined threshold

Reviewer 4: Ditto my comments above - degraded means no cluster upgrades. Do we want this?

Reviewer 4: It appears that prior GH comments we reached consensus that Degraded is a desirable condition. I would like to see this justification reflected in the proposal itself.

- basic functionality is tested
- this new functionality is documented in the Insights Operator documentation as tech preview

#### Tech Preview -> GA
- `Share` resource object is automatically created by the Insights Operator
- inform a cluster user about the error state (problem with pulling the certificates)
- the documentation is revisited and updated
- the use of SCA certs in the `Build` is documented in the Build API documentation
- the feature might be moved to a different OCP component

#### Removing a deprecated feature

The periodical data pulling can be easily disabled in the cluster configuration. Removing this feature will require updating the Insights operator code base and will remove the `etc-pki-entitlement` secret from the `openshift-config-managed` namespace.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> There is no upgrade/downgrade strategy needed.

Reviewer 5: If a cluster is downgraded to a version that does not poll for entitlement updates, will that version of the insights operator (4.8.z?) have logic around to remove the `etc-pki-entitlement` secret and other cruft to keep in-cluster components from trying to consume stale data?  If the insights operator is downgraded before some consumer (builds and/or CSI drivers?), will the higher-version consumers gracefully handle the consumed secret's removal?

Author: Yes this sounds like an edge case to me and yes there will be a stale secret in such case.

The Insights Operator must provide a cluster ID as an identifier of the cluster.

### SCA certs in API

> The SCA certificate is available via the `etc-pki-entitlement` secret in the `openshift-config-managed` namespace. The secret will be available for use in other namespaces by creating a cluster-scoped `Share` resource. Cluster admin creates a `clusterrolebinding` to allow a service account access to the `Share` resource.

Reviewer 3: link to the csi-shared-resource driver page, especially since this isn't something that just exists on clusters today:

https://github.com/openshift/csi-driver-shared-resource

Author: Linked at https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/683/files#diff-93dffd2aa59c973a916306675f62907275cff29ff9a16ba77aaf98cfa830249fR100
